<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<title>3. The Invention of Ownership Societies</title>
<meta content="urn:uuid:d14591c1-b288-450e-b3bf-9c284094577c" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div class="body">
<p class="sp"> </p>
<section aria-labelledby="ch3" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter">
<hgroup>
<h1 class="chapter-number" id="ch3"><span aria-label="99" id="pg_99" role="doc-pagebreak"/><a href="contents.xhtml#c_ch3">{ <samp class="SANS_Cronos_Pro_Regular_SC_11">THREE</samp> }</a></h1>
<h1 class="chapter-title"><a href="contents.xhtml#c_ch3"><i>The Invention of Ownership Societies</i></a></h1>
</hgroup>
<p class="noindent">In the previous chapter we looked at some general characteristics of ternary (or trifunctional) societies, especially European societies of orders. The purpose of this chapter is to analyze how those trifunctional societies were gradually transformed into ownership societies in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, at a pace and via pathways that varied from country to country. In <a href="part_2.xhtml">Part Two</a> we will look at non-European ternary societies (especially India and China) and examine how their encounter with European proprietarian and colonial powers influenced the conditions under which states emerged and premodern trifunctional structures were transformed, which also yielded a variety of specific trajectories. Before we do that, however, we need to pursue the analysis of European trajectories a bit further.</p>
<p>In this chapter I will take a more detailed look at the French Revolution of 1789, which marked an emblematic rupture between the Ancien R<span class="accent">é</span>gime society of orders and the bourgeois ownership society that flourished in France in the nineteenth century. In the space of a few years revolutionary lawmakers attempted a complete overhaul of all power and property relations. Analyzing what they did will give us a better grasp on the magnitude of the task and the contradictions they encountered. We will also discover how complex and ambiguous political and legal processes collided with the issue of inequality and concentration of wealth. Ultimately, the French Revolution gave rise to an extremely inegalitarian proprietarian society, which lasted from 1800 to 1914; this will be the subject of the next chapter. Comparison with other European countries, especially the United Kingdom and Sweden, will then afford us insight into the respective roles of revolutionary processes versus long-term trends (associated with state formation and the evolution of socioeconomic structures) in the transformation of ternary societies into ownership societies. We will see that many trajectories and forks in the road are possible.</p>
<section epub:type="division">
<h1 class="head a-head"><a id="sec33"/><span aria-label="100" id="pg_100" role="doc-pagebreak"/><i>The “Great Demarcation” of 1789 and the Invention of Modern Property</i></h1>
<p class="noindent">To gain a better understanding of the “Great Demarcation”* of 1789 separating trifunctional societies from the ownership societies that succeeded them, let us begin by looking at what was probably the most decisive moment in this transition. On the night of August 4, 1789, the French National Assembly voted to abolish the privileges of the clergy and nobility. In the months, weeks, and years that followed, the challenge was to define exactly what the word “privilege” meant and thus to establish the dividing line between prerogatives that should simply be abolished and those that were legitimate and therefore worthy of perpetuation or compensation, perhaps requiring reformulation in a new political and legal language.</p>
<p>The theory of power and property to which revolutionary lawmakers adhered was in principle fairly clear. Its purpose was to draw a sharp distinction between, on the one hand, the regalian powers (of security, justice, and legitimate violence) henceforth to be monopolized by the centralized state and, on the other hand, property rights, which only individuals could claim. The latter were to be full, complete, and inviolable, as well as guaranteed by the state, whose primary if not sole mission should be to protect them. In practice, however, establishing the rights of property proved to be a far more complex undertaking than this simple theory would suggest. This was because regalian powers and property rights were so intimately intertwined at the local level that it was extremely difficult to define consistent norms of justice acceptable to all the relevant actors, particularly when it came to the initial allocation of property rights. Once this initial allocation was firmly established, people knew (or thought they knew) how to proceed. But it proved very difficult to decide which existing claims deserved to be preserved as new property rights and which should simply be suppressed.</p>
<p>Recent work, especially that of Rafe Blaufarb, has shown that in order to understand these debates, one needs to distinguish several periods.<sup><a href="#footnote-087" id="footnote-087-backlink" role="doc-noteref">1</a></sup> In the first phase (1789–1790), the committee of the National Assembly in charge of these <span aria-label="101" id="pg_101" role="doc-pagebreak"/>delicate issues adopted what it termed a “historical” approach. The idea was to examine the origins of each right in order to determine its legitimacy and in particular whether it was of a “contractual” nature (in which case it should be maintained) or a “noncontractual” nature (in which case it should be abolished). For instance, a right linked to the unwarranted exercise of seigneurial power (hence “feudal”) or derived from the illegitimate appropriation of some aspect of public authority should be deemed “noncontractual” and therefore abolished without compensation. Fiscal privileges were the most obvious example of this: the nobility and clergy were exempt from the payment of certain taxes. Jurisdictional powers were also deemed noncontractual. The right to dispense justice within a specified territory (sometimes known as <i>seigneurie publique</i>) was therefore withdrawn from lords and transferred to the centralized state without compensation. The immediate consequence of this was disruption of the lower levels of the judicial system (which to a large extent relied on seigneurial courts). The idea that the state should exercise a monopoly of the judicial function became firmly fixed in people’s minds.</p>
<p>The ecclesiastical tithe was also abolished, and church property was nationalized, again without compensation, which provoked vigorous debate since many people (among them Abb<span class="accent">é</span> Siey<span class="accent">è</span>s, as noted in the previous chapter) feared that the religious, educational, and hospital services previously provided by the Church would suffer. But proponents of abolishing the tithe and nationalizing clerical property insisted that public sovereignty could not be divided and that it was therefore intolerable for the Church to remain the permanent beneficiary of a state-enforced tax, which would have left it in the position of a quasi-state organization. For good measure, crown property was included along with Church property under the head of <i>biens nationaux</i> to be sold at auction. The general philosophy was that the state—one and indivisible—would finance itself in the future through annual taxes duly approved by representatives of the citizenry, whereas the exploitation of perpetual property would henceforth be left to private individuals.<sup><a href="#footnote-086" id="footnote-086-backlink" role="doc-noteref">2</a></sup></p>
<p>Beyond these few relatively clear cases (fiscal privileges, public seigneuries, tithe, and Church property), it proved very difficult to agree on other “privileges” to be eliminated without compensation. In particular, most seigneurial dues—that is, payments in cash or kind by peasants to nobles—were in fact <span aria-label="102" id="pg_102" role="doc-pagebreak"/>maintained, at least initially. Take the paradigmatic case of a peasant who farmed a plot of land in exchange for which he paid rent to a landlord: the general principle was that such rent was legitimate. The landlord-tenant relationship had the appearance of a legitimate “contractual” relationship as revolutionary legislators understood it; hence the former seigneurial dues should be continued in the form of rent. The lord could continue to collect rents—this was called <i>seigneurie privée</i>—but could no longer dispense justice <i>(seigneurie publique).</i> All legislative effort went to distinguishing these two components of the seigneurial relationship so as to set the new, modern concept of ownership apart from the old feudal system.</p>
</section>
<section epub:type="division">
<h1 class="head a-head"><a id="sec34"/><span class="h1_I">Corv</span><span class="h1_accent_I">é</span><span class="h1_I">es, Banalit</span><span class="h1_accent_I">é</span><span class="h1_I">s, Loyers:</span> <i>From Feudalism to Proprietarianism</i></h1>
<p class="noindent">As early as 1789–1790, however, an exception was made for the <i>corvée,</i> that is, the peasant’s obligation to provide the landlord with a certain number of days of unpaid labor. Traditionally, peasants had been required to work one or two days a week and sometimes even more on the lord’s land. Also excepted were <i>banalités,</i> or seigneurial monopolies on various local services, such as mills, bridges, presses, ovens, and so on. Both were in principle to be abolished without compensation. <i>Corvées</i> in particular smacked too much of serfdom and the old seigneurial order. This had supposedly disappeared centuries earlier, but the terminology (if not the reality) persisted in the French countryside. Maintaining these privileges openly and without limitation would have been interpreted as an unacceptable betrayal of the revolutionary spirit and the meaning of the Night of August 4.</p>
<p>In practice, however, the committees and tribunals charged with applying the directives of the National Assembly found in many cases that the <i>corvée</i> had a contractual basis. It was seen as a kind of rent <i>(loyer);</i> the difference between a rent paid in cash or kind and a labor service was often more a matter of words than anything else. Accordingly, such services were to be maintained or else explicitly transformed into rent paid in cash or kind: for instance, a <i>corvée</i> of one day a week could be converted into a rent equal to a fifth or sixth or the harvest. Or it could be redeemed (that is, wiped out by a cash payment from the peasant to the lord), a solution many legislators regarded as a compromise. Many were afraid that straightforward elimination of the <i>corvée</i> without redemption or compensation of any kind might undermine the very concept of rent, if not of property in general.</p>
<p><span aria-label="103" id="pg_103" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Most poor peasants could not afford to redeem <i>corvées</i> or other seigneurial dues, however, especially since the assembly and its committees set a high price on redemption. The value of land was fixed at the equivalent of twenty years of rent for payments in cash and twenty-five years for payments in kind, which reflected the fact that the average yield of agricultural land at the time amounted to 4–5 percent of the local land price. This was completely out of reach for most peasants. Where the <i>corvée</i> was particularly onerous (say, several days a week of unpaid labor), the price of redemption might be high enough to leave the peasant in a situation of perpetual debt close to serfdom or slavery. In practice, redemption of seigneurial rights and national properties was limited to a small minority of noble or non-noble buyers with sufficient cash reserves; most peasants were excluded.</p>
<p>In some cases, <i>banalités</i> were also maintained, especially where it was difficult to provide a public service in any form other than a monopoly; for instance, when conditions were such that constructing a mill would have been particularly costly so that building several mills would have had a detrimental effect on their economic viability. Such natural monopolies were acknowledged to be justified, and so it was only right, legislators reasoned, that the profits should go to the person who built and owned the facility, which usually meant the local lord, unless he had sold out to some newcomer. These were difficult issues to resolve in practice. Again, they illustrate the inextricable mingling of property rights with quasi-public services in trifunctional society. The problem here was the same as with the tithe—its champions argued that it financed schools, dispensaries, and granaries for the poor. In practice, <i>banalités</i> were not preserved as often as <i>corvées,</i> yet they still provoked violent opposition from the peasantry when they were.</p>
<p>Broadly speaking, the “historical” approach taken in 1789–1790 faced one major obstacle: how to establish the “contractual” origin of any particular right. Provided one went far enough, perhaps several centuries, back in time, it was obvious to everyone that violence played a part in the acquisition of most seigneurial rights, which stemmed from conquest and serfdom. If one followed this logic to the end, it was clear that the very idea of a contractual origin of property rights was pure fiction. For revolutionary legislators, most of whom were bourgeois property owners or at any rate people less destitute than the masses, the goal was more modest: namely, to strike a reasonable compromise that would reestablish society on a stable foundation without undermining property rights in general. They feared that any other approach would lead straight to chaos, to say nothing of threatening their own property rights.</p>
<p><span aria-label="104" id="pg_104" role="doc-pagebreak"/>The historical approach was therefore in reality quite conservative. In practice, it allowed most seigneurial rights to continue with little change as long as enough time had passed to give them the appearance of settled acquisitions. The logical was “historical,” not in the sense that legislators sought to discover the real historic origins of any particular right but rather in the sense that any property right (or similar relationship) that had existed for a long enough time was regarded as prima facie legitimate.</p>
<p>This approach was often summed up by the famous adage <i>“nulle terre sans seigneur,”</i> no land without a lord. In other words, without incontestable proof to the contrary, and apart from a few explicitly inventoried cases, the basic principle was that payments in cash or kind received by the lord had a legitimate contractual origin and therefore remained enforceable, even if the terms of the contract now had to be rephrased in a new language.</p>
<p>In some provinces, especially in the south of France, however, a quite different legal tradition prevailed: its principle was “no lord without title.” In other words, without written evidence of title, ownership could not be established, and no payment was justified. In that region, where written law predominated, the assembly’s directives were not well received. In any case, most property titles, even when they did exist, were to be treated with caution since many had been established by the lords themselves or else by courts they controlled. As a result, peasants in many areas attacked lords in their castles in 1789, seeking to burn any titles they could find, which only added to the confusion.</p>
<p>The situation veered out of control as tensions with foreign governments increased, and the Revolution took a harsher turn. The National Assembly became the Constituent Assembly and adopted a new constitution, turning France into a constitutional monarchy with a property qualification for voting. In June 1791 Louis XVI attempted to flee and was arrested at Varennes in eastern France. The king was accused (not without reason) of seeking to join exiled nobles and plotting with foreign monarchies to crush the Revolution militarily. As war clouds gathered, an insurrection in August 1792 ended with the king’s arrest; five months later, in January 1793, he was guillotined. A new assembly known as the National Convention was put in place and charged with drafting a republican constitution based on universal suffrage; this was adopted but did not go into effect before the convention itself was toppled in 1795. Meanwhile, French forces won a decisive victory at Valmy in September 1792, marking the triumph of the republican idea and the symbolic defeat of the trifunctional order. Although France’s armies were deprived of their natural leaders, who had fled abroad, they triumphed over the combined forces of monarchy led by no<span aria-label="105" id="pg_105" role="doc-pagebreak"/>bles from across Europe. Here was living proof that the people in arms could do without the old noble warrior class. Goethe, who witnessed the battle from a nearby hilltop, was in no doubt about the meaning of the event: “In this place on this date begins a new era in world history.”</p>
<p>Meanwhile, enforcement of the privilege-abolishing law of August 4, 1789, took a more radical turn. From 1792 on it became increasingly common to reverse the burden of proof by demanding that lords prove the contractual basis of their claims to property rights. In July 1793 the convention issued a decree that took this one step further, adopting what was called a “linguistic” approach: all seigneurial rights and ground rents were to be abolished immediately, without compensation, if the terminology designating them was directly linked to the old feudal order.</p>
<p>This decree applied not only to <i>corvées</i> and <i>banalités</i> but also to many similar obligations, such as <i>cens</i> and <i>lods.</i> The <i>cens</i> was a form of rent paid to a lord and at one point was linked to a tie of vassalage (that is, political and military subordination). The <i>lod</i> was even more interesting, partly because it was so common (in many provinces it was the primary mode of payment to landlords) and partly because it so perfectly illustrated the intimate connection between former regalian rights (which the revolutionaries considered illegitimate) and modern property rights (which they deemed legitimate).</p>
</section>
<section epub:type="division">
<h1 class="head a-head"><a id="sec35"/><span class="h1_I">Lods</span> <i>and the Superposition of Perpetual Rights under the Ancien Régime</i></h1>
<p class="noindent">Under the Ancien R<span class="accent">é</span>gime, the <i>lod</i> was a seigneurial <i>droit de mutation:</i> a peasant who had acquired the right to use a plot of land in perpetuity (sometimes known as <i>seigneurie utile</i>) and who wished to sell that right to another person had to purchase a “right of mutation” (the <i>lod</i>) from the lord who had <i>seigneurie directe</i> over the property. The term <i>seigneurie directe</i> could itself be decomposed into two parts, private and public. The private part covered rights to the land while the public part referred to the judicial rights that went along with ownership. In practice, the <i>lod</i> could represent a significant sum, which varied from a twelfth to half of the amount of the sale (or two to ten years of rent).<sup><a href="#footnote-085" id="footnote-085-backlink" role="doc-noteref">3</a></sup> The origin of this payment was generally linked to the lord’s judicial power over the region in question: because the lord rendered justice, recorded transactions, <span aria-label="106" id="pg_106" role="doc-pagebreak"/>guaranteed the security of persons and property, and settled disputes, he was entitled to payment of the <i>lod</i> when usage rights of a property were transferred from one person to another.</p>
<p>The <i>lod</i> might or might not be accompanied by other payments that were sometimes annual, sometimes paid at fixed intervals (the term <i>lod</i> often referred to a package of obligations and payments rather than a single sum). Because the <i>lod</i> originated with the lord’s judicial powers, one might have expected it to be abolished without compensation, like the tithe and the <i>seigneurie publique.</i> In practice, however, usage of the <i>lod</i> had expanded well beyond its original purpose; revolutionary legislators (or at any rate the most conservative and least bold among them) therefore feared that eliminating it without compensation might undermine the entire proprietarian social order, plunging the country into chaos.</p>
<p>Broadly speaking, one of the characteristics of property relations in the Ancien R<span class="accent">é</span>gime (and, more generally, in many premodern ternary societies) was the superposition of different types of perpetual rights over the same piece of land (or other property). For instance, one person might enjoy the right to perpetual use of a plot of land (including the right to sell to other individuals), while another might enjoy the right to receive a perpetual payment on a regular basis (such as an annual rent in cash or kind, possibly dependent on the size of the harvest), and yet another might benefit from a right exercised when a transaction took place (a <i>lod</i>). Still another individual might hold a monopoly on the oven or mill needed to prepare the product of the land for market (a <i>banalité</i>), and another might be entitled to payment of part of a harvest on the occasion of a religious holiday or other ceremony. And so on.</p>
<p>These individual “owners” might be lords, peasants, bishoprics, religious or military orders, monasteries, corporations, or bourgeois. The French Revolution put an end to the superposition of rights and declared that the only perpetual right belonged to the owner of the property; all other rights were necessarily temporary (such as a lease or fixed-term rental contract), with the exception of the state’s perpetual right to collect taxes and promulgate new rules.<sup><a href="#footnote-084" id="footnote-084-backlink" role="doc-noteref">4</a></sup> Instead of superposing perpetual rights subject to the rights and duties <span aria-label="107" id="pg_107" role="doc-pagebreak"/>of the two privileged orders as under the Ancien R<span class="accent">é</span>gime, the Revolution sought to restructure society around two primary actors: the private property owner and the centralized state.</p>
<p>In the case of the <i>lod,</i> the solution adopted by the Revolution was to create a public cadastre, the central and emblematic institution of the new ownership society, of which this was the foundational act. Henceforth, the centralized state would maintain a vast register listing all legitimate owners of fields and forests, houses and other buildings, warehouses and factories, and goods and property of every imaginable description. This register would have branches at the local and regional level: prefects and subprefects carefully established maps of <i>départements</i> and <i>communes,</i> which took the place of a complex patchwork of overlapping territories and jurisdictions that constituted the Ancien R<span class="accent">é</span>gime.</p>
<p>It was therefore quite natural for revolutionary assemblies to transfer the <i>lod</i> to the state in the context of the new fiscal system established in 1790–1791. The <i>droits de mutations</i> (sales taxes on property transfers) created at that time took the form of a fairly heavy proportional tax on sales of land and buildings. Payment of the tax allowed the new owner to register his property (and if need be establish his title to it); the proceeds went to the government (apart from a small additional component paid to the notary charged with drawing up the necessary documents). These <i>droits de mutation</i> still exist in France to this day, in virtually the same form as when they were created; they amount to roughly two years of rent, which is not insignificant.<sup><a href="#footnote-083" id="footnote-083-backlink" role="doc-noteref">5</a></sup> During debates in the period 1789–1790, there was never any doubt that the <i>lod</i> would become a tax paid to the state (and cease to be a seigneurial right) nor that maintaining the cadastre and protecting property rights would become a state responsibility: this was the very foundation of the new proprietarian political regime. The question was what would be done about the existing <i>lods.</i> Should they be abolished <span aria-label="108" id="pg_108" role="doc-pagebreak"/>without compensation for the existing beneficiaries, or should they be treated as legitimate property rights, which would then be translated into the new judicial vocabulary? Or—a third possibility—should they be eliminated, but with compensation?</p>
<p>In 1789–1790, the assembly opted for full compensation of the <i>lods.</i> A schedule of payments was even established: a peasant (or other holder of usage rights for a plot of land or other property who was by no means always the actual tiller of the soil) could redeem the <i>lod</i> for a sum ranging from one-third to five-sixths of the most recent sale, depending on the rate of the <i>lod</i> to be redeemed; this was a fairly high price.<sup><a href="#footnote-082" id="footnote-082-backlink" role="doc-noteref">6</a></sup> If the potential buyer could not come up with the sum required, the <i>lod</i> could be replaced by an equivalent rent: for example, a half-rent if the <i>lod</i> was fixed at half the value of the property (all this in addition to the state <i>droit de mutation</i>). Thus the assembly envisioned that an authentic former feudal right would become a modern property right, just as former <i>corvées,</i> linked to serfdom, were transformed into rents.</p>
<p>In 1793, the convention decided to reject this logic: <i>lods</i> were to be abolished without compensation, so that users of the land would become full owners without being forced to pay out of pocket in the form of a redemption fee or rent. More than any other measure, this reflected the convention’s ambition to redistribute wealth. But this approach was relatively short-lived (1793–1794). Under the French Directory (1795–1799) and even more under the French Consulate and First French Empire (1799–1814), the country’s new leaders reinstated the property qualifications and other more conservative dispositions of the early stages of the Revolution.<sup><a href="#footnote-081" id="footnote-081-backlink" role="doc-noteref">7</a></sup> They nevertheless ran into trouble when it came to canceling transfers of ownership (through straightforward abolition of the <i>lods</i>) decided in 1793–1794, as the concerned peasants and other beneficiaries were not about to give up their new rights without a fight. Broadly <span aria-label="109" id="pg_109" role="doc-pagebreak"/>speaking, the many legal twists and turns of the revolutionary years gave rise to a spate of lawsuits, which would occupy the courts through much of the nineteenth century, especially when property was sold or passed on to heirs.</p>
</section>
<section epub:type="division">
<h1 class="head a-head"><a id="sec36"/><i>Can Property Be Placed on a New Footing Without Measuring Its Extent?</i></h1>
<p class="noindent">Among the difficulties that the convention faced in 1793–1794, the most problematic was the fact that the term <i>lod</i> appeared very frequently in land contracts during the Ancien R<span class="accent">é</span>gime. Many contracts between parties who had no noble or “feudal” antecedents used the word to designate the payment to be made in exchange for the right to use the land, even when it took the form of a quasi-rent (usually paid quarterly or annually) rather than a sum paid only when usage rights changed hands. In many cases the word <i>lod</i> thus became a synonym for ground rent <i>(rente foncière)</i> or rent in general <i>(loyer),</i> regardless of its exact form.</p>
<p>With the “linguistic” approach, one could therefore find oneself outright expropriating a non-noble (and not necessarily wealthy) landowner who had simply rented land acquired a few years before the Revolution but who had had the unfortunate idea of using the word <i>lod</i> or <i>cens</i> in the rental contract. However, an authentic aristocrat could go on placidly collecting significant seigneurial dues acquired by violent means in the feudal era as long as the vocabulary used in his dealings with the peasants used the words <i>rente</i> or <i>loyer</i> instead of <i>lod</i> or <i>cens.</i> In the face of such glaring injustices, revolutionary committees and tribunals were often forced to backtrack so that no one knew any longer what new principles were being followed.</p>
<p>In hindsight, of course, it is possible to imagine other possible solutions that would have avoided the pitfalls of both the “historical” and “linguistic” approaches. Was it really possible to define the conditions of just ownership without taking inequality of ownership into account—that is, without taking into account the value of each property and the extent of the patrimonial holdings in question? In other words, to establish the property regime on a new footing acceptable to the majority, would it not have made more sense to treat small holdings (such as plots suitable for a family farm) differently from very large holdings (such as estates large enough to support hundreds or thousands of family farms), regardless of the vocabulary used to designate the remuneration in each case (<i>lods, rentes, loyers,</i> and so on)? It is not always a good idea to search for origins when seeking patrimonial justice. And even if it is sometimes <span aria-label="110" id="pg_110" role="doc-pagebreak"/>inevitable, it is probably best to think about the size and social significance of the fortunes involved. The task is not simple, but is there any other way to go about it?</p>
<p>In fact, the revolutionary assemblies did provide a stage on which many debates about progressive taxation of income and wealth played out, especially in connection with various projects to establish a <i>droit national d’hérédité</i> (national inheritance tax), the rate of which varied with the size of the bequest. For instance, in a bill proposed in the fall of 1792 by Sieur Lacoste, an administrator in the Registry of National Estates, the smallest bequests were to be taxed at less than 5 percent, whereas the rate on the largest was to be more than 65 percent (even for direct line bequests—that is, from parents to children).<sup><a href="#footnote-080" id="footnote-080-backlink" role="doc-noteref">8</a></sup> Ambitious progressive tax proposals had also been put forward in the decades prior to the Revolution, such as the one published in 1767 by Louis Graslin, a tax collector and city planner in Nantes, who envisioned a tax gradually rising from 5 percent on the lowest incomes to 75 percent on the highest (<a href="chapter_3.xhtml#tab3-1">Table 3.1</a>).<sup><a href="#footnote-079" id="footnote-079-backlink" role="doc-noteref">9</a></sup> To be sure, the highest rates proposed in these pamphlets applied only to extremely high incomes (more than a thousand times the average income of the day). But such extreme disparities did exist in late-eighteenth-century French society, and if these tax schedules had been applied within the framework of the law and parliamentary procedure, those inequalities could have been cor<span aria-label="111" id="pg_111" role="doc-pagebreak"/>rected. The proposed tax schedules envisioned substantial rates on the order of 20–30 percent (which was quite high, especially for an inheritance tax) for levels of wealth and income on the order of ten to twenty times the average, well below the levels associated with the high nobility and <i>haute bourgeoisie</i> of the era. This shows that the authors had fairly ambitious ideas of social reform and redistribution, ideas that could not be limited to a tiny minority of the super-privileged if they were to have any real effect.</p>
<figure class="table">
<table class="No-Table-Style">
<colgroup>
<col/>
<col/>
<col/>
<col/>
<col/>
<col/>
<col/>
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td class="TN" colspan="7">
<p class="TN"><a id="tab3-1"/><small>TABLE</small> 3.1</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="TT" colspan="7">
<p class="TT"><i>Progressive tax proposals in eighteenth-century France</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="TCH" colspan="3">
<p class="TH1"><b>Graslin: Progressive income tax (</b><b><i>Essai analytique sur la richesse et l’impôt,</i></b> <b>1767)</b></p>
</td>
<td class="TCH"/>
<td class="TCH" colspan="3">
<p class="TH1"><b>Lacoste: Progressive inheritance tax (</b><b><i>Du droit national d’hérédité,</i></b> <b>1792)</b></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="TCH">
<p class="TCH"><b>Multiple of average income</b></p>
</td>
<td class="TCH"/>
<td class="TCH">
<p class="TCH-C"><b>Effective tax rate</b></p>
</td>
<td class="TCH"/>
<td class="TCH">
<p class="TCH-C"><b>Multiple of average estate</b></p>
</td>
<td class="TCH"/>
<td class="TCH">
<p class="TCH-C"><b>Effective tax rate</b></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="TB">
<p class="TB">0.5</p>
</td>
<td class="TB"/>
<td class="TB">
<p class="TB-C">5%</p>
</td>
<td class="TB"/>
<td class="TB">
<p class="TB-C">0.3</p>
</td>
<td class="TB"/>
<td class="TB">
<p class="TB-C">6%</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="TB">
<p class="TB">20</p>
</td>
<td class="TB"/>
<td class="TB">
<p class="TB-C">15%</p>
</td>
<td class="TB"/>
<td class="TB">
<p class="TB-C">8</p>
</td>
<td class="TB"/>
<td class="TB">
<p class="TB-C">14%</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="TB">
<p class="TB">200</p>
</td>
<td class="TB"/>
<td class="TB">
<p class="TB-C">50%</p>
</td>
<td class="TB"/>
<td class="TB">
<p class="TB-C">500</p>
</td>
<td class="TB"/>
<td class="TB">
<p class="TB-C">40%</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="TBL">
<p class="TB">1300</p>
</td>
<td class="TBL"/>
<td class="TBL">
<p class="TB-C">75%</p>
</td>
<td class="TBL"/>
<td class="TBL">
<p class="TB-C">1500</p>
</td>
<td class="TBL"/>
<td class="TBL">
<p class="TB-C">67%</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="TFN" colspan="7">
<p class="TFN"><i>Interpretation:</i> In the progressive income tax proposed by Graslin in 1767, the effective tax rate rose gradually from 5 percent on an annual income of 150 <i>livres tournois</i> (roughly half the average income of the time) to 75 percent on an income of 400,000 livres (roughly 1,300 times the average). Lacoste’s proposed progressive inheritance tax exhibits similar progressivity.</p>
<p class="TSN"><i>Sources:</i> piketty.pse.ens.fr/ideology.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</figure>
<p>Yet no tangible progressive tax was ultimately adopted during the Revolution. True, there were a few brief experiments with progressive local taxes in 1793–1794, when the convention dispatched missions to a number of <i>départements.</i> Emergency financial measures of a progressive character were put in place to finance the war, most notably the forced loan of 1793 (which reached a level of 25 percent for incomes of 3,000 <i>livres tournois,</i> roughly ten times the average income at the time, and 70 percent for incomes of 15,000, or fifty times the average, while incomes less than a third of the average were exempted).<sup><a href="#footnote-078" id="footnote-078-backlink" role="doc-noteref">10</a></sup> <span aria-label="112" id="pg_112" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Nevertheless, the central fact remains that the new tax system established by the Revolution in 1790–1791 consisted mainly of strictly proportional taxes with the same moderate rate applied to all levels of income and wealth, no matter how minuscule or gigantic. Note, too, that no agrarian reform or other broad program of wealth redistribution as ambitious as Lacoste or Graslin’s tax proposals was ever explicitly formulated.</p>
<p>As we will see, the legal and fiscal system adopted during the Revolution encouraged the accumulation of large fortunes, which goes a long way toward explaining the growing concentration of wealth in France in the nineteenth century. Not until the crises of the early twentieth century did there emerge a steeply progressive system of taxation of income and wealth in France or anywhere else. The same is true of explicitly redistributive agrarian reform programs, comparable to those that emerged in very different contexts in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. No such program was ever attempted in France during the revolutionary period.</p>
<p>Even during the most ambitiously redistributive phase of the Revolution, 1793–1794, debate focused mainly on the issue of <i>corvées</i> and <i>banalités, lods,</i> and redemption of rights. Legislators tried first a “historical” and later a “linguistic” approach to the abolition of privileges. This gave rise to complex and passionate debate, but the question of inequality in the size of individual patrimonial holdings was never really approached in an explicit and coherent way. Things might have gone differently but didn’t, and it is interesting to try to understand why.</p>
</section>
<section epub:type="division">
<h1 class="head a-head"><a id="sec37"/><i>Knowledge, Power, and Emancipation: The Transformation of Ternary Societies</i></h1>
<p class="noindent">To recapitulate, the French Revolution can be seen as an experiment with accelerated transformation of a premodern ternary society. A fundamental feature of this experiment was the “Great Demarcation” project, which created a dividing line between old and new forms of power and property. The goal of the Great Demarcation was to create a strict separation between regalian functions (henceforth the monopoly of the centralized state) and property rights <span aria-label="113" id="pg_113" role="doc-pagebreak"/>(henceforth to be granted solely to private individuals), whereas trifunctional society was based on an inextricable imbrication of both. The Great Demarcation was in some ways a success in that it contributed to a durable transformation of French society and, to some extent, neighboring societies as well. It was also the first attempt to create a social and political order founded on equal rights for everyone, independent of social origin. All this took place, moreover, in what was by contemporary standards a very large country that for centuries had been organized around enormous status and geographic inequalities. Still, this ambitious Great Demarcation ran into many problems: for all its limitations and injustices, trifunctional society had its own coherence, and the reorganization proposed by the new proprietarian regime contained numerous contradictions. The social role of the Church was eliminated without creating a social state to replace it; the definition of private property was tightened without expanding access to it; and so on.</p>
<p>On the key question of inequality of ownership, moreover, the failure of the French Revolution is clear. One does see a renewal of elites over the course of the nineteenth century (continuing a process that was already under way in earlier centuries, although we lack the tools to measure its extent in different periods), but the fact is that patrimonial holdings remained extremely concentrated between 1789 and 1914 (with a sharp increase in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, as we will see in <a href="chapter_4.xhtml">Chapter 4</a>)—and in the end the Revolution had little effect in this regard. Why this partial failure? It was not only because the issues were novel and complex but also because political time accelerated: although certain ideas were ripe for application, there was no time to put them to the test in concrete experiments. Events—rather than knowledge patiently accumulated—dictated their law to revolutionary legislators and France’s new leaders.</p>
<p>Furthermore, the experience of the French Revolution illustrates a more general lesson that we will encounter again and again: historical change stems from the interaction between, on the one hand, the short-term logic of political events and, on the other hand, the long-term logic of political ideologies. Evolving ideas are nothing unless they lead to institutional experiments and practical demonstrations; ideas must find their application in the heat of events, in social struggles, insurrections, and crises. Conversely, political actors caught up in fast-moving events often have no choice but to draw on a repertoire of political and economic ideologies elaborated in the past. At times they may be able to invent new tools on the spur of the moment, but to do so takes time and a capacity for experimentation that are generally lacking.</p>
<p><span aria-label="114" id="pg_114" role="doc-pagebreak"/>In the case of the French Revolution, it is interesting to note that debates about the legitimate or illegitimate origins of seigneurial rights had to some extent already taken place in previous centuries. The problem was that those debates often hinged on general historical considerations and offered no truly operational solutions to the concrete questions that would arise in the heat of action. As far back as the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, jurists such as Charles Dumoulin, Jean Bodin, and Charles Loyseau had criticized the way lords—some of whom owed their titles to very early waves of invasion (especially by Franks, Huns, and Normans between the fifth and eleventh centuries)—had taken advantage of the weakness of princes to acquire excessive rights. On the other hand, champions of the seigneurial view, such as Henri de Boulainvilliers and Montesquieu in the eighteenth century, insisted that while the Franks had certainly profited from their initial position of strength, they had subsequently acquired new legitimacy by protecting populations over the course of many centuries, notably against the Normans and Hungarians. The problem was that such discussions of military history, as revealing as they may be about the legitimation of the nobility as a warrior class in the eighteenth century, were not of much use in establishing the conditions for a just refoundation of property rights.</p>
<p>Those earlier debates dealt essentially with the respective roles of the centralized state and local elites. Both Boulainvilliers and Montesquieu defended the idea of preserving <i>seigneuries publiques</i> and the sale of charges and offices (a practice that was also abolished during the Revolution, usually with financial compensation to existing officeholders); it was important, they reasoned, to maintain the separation of powers and provide a check on the power of the king. Montesquieu’s <i>De l’esprit des lois (The Spirit of the Laws),</i> published in 1748, became an essential reference on the question of separation of powers. Commentators often forget to mention, however, that for Montesquieu, who had himself inherited the highly lucrative position of president of the Parlement of Bordeaux, it was not enough to separate the executive, legislative, and judiciary branches of government. It was also necessary to preserve local seigneurial courts and the “venality” (that is, vendibility and heritability) of charges and offices in the provincial parlements in order to limit the power of the central state and prevent the monarch from becoming a despot like the sultan of Turkey (note in passing that negative comments on the Orient come quite as naturally to the pen of Siey<span class="accent">è</span>s, who denounced noble privileges, as to that of Montesquieu, who defended them). The Revolution rejected the view of authors like Boulainvilliers and Montesquieu: the power to render justice was transferred <span aria-label="115" id="pg_115" role="doc-pagebreak"/>from the old seigneurial class to the centralized state, and the venality of offices was ended.<sup><a href="#footnote-077" id="footnote-077-backlink" role="doc-noteref">11</a></sup></p>
<p>In retrospect, it is easy to criticize the conservative positions taken by the champions of seigneurial jurisdictional privileges and the venality of judicial and administrative functions. With the advantage of more than two centuries of hindsight, it seems obvious—as it may already have seemed to the most clairvoyant observers in the eighteenth century—that justice can be rendered in a more satisfactory and impartial way in the framework of a universal public service organized by the central state than in seigneurial courts or a system based on the venality of charges and offices. More generally, it seems fairly clear today that a properly organized state is in a better position to guarantee fundamental rights and individual liberties than a trifunctional system based on the power of local elites and the privileges of noble and clerical classes. French peasants were certainly freer in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries than in the eighteenth century, if only because they were no longer subject to arbitrary seigneurial justice.</p>
<p>It is nevertheless important to emphasize that the question of confidence in the centralized state, which underlies these fundamental debates, is a highly complex one, which had no obvious answer until concrete experiments had been conducted with the new state powers. Confidence in the state’s ability to render justice fairly and impartially throughout a vast territory, to guarantee security, collect taxes, and provide police, educational, and medical services more justly and efficiently than the old privileged orders was not something that could be decreed from an academic chair. It had to be demonstrated in practice. At bottom, Montesquieu’s fears of a potentially despotic state (which led to his defense of local seigneurial courts) are not very different from the suspicions of various forms of supranational state power that one sees today.</p>
<p>For instance, many defenders of interstate competition ignore the fact that some states establish opaque laws that allow them to function as tax or regulatory havens (of particular benefit to the wealthy), justifying their position by pointing to the risk to individual freedom that would result from overcentralization of information and judicial authority under the aegis of a single state. <span aria-label="116" id="pg_116" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Such arguments are of course often covertly self-serving (as in Montesquieu’s case). Nevertheless, their (at least partial) plausibility makes them that much more politically effective, and only successful historical experimentation can lead to a radical shift in the political and ideological balance of power with issues of this type.</p>
</section>
<section epub:type="division">
<h1 class="head a-head"><a id="sec38"/><i>The Revolution, the Centralized State, and Learning about Justice</i></h1>
<p class="noindent">To sum up, the central question that the French Revolution resolved was that of regalian powers and the centralized state; it did not have an answer when it came to the just distribution of property. Its primary objective was to transfer regalian powers from local noble and clerical elites to the central state, not to organize a broad redistribution of wealth. However, it quickly became apparent that it was not easy to separate the two objectives so neatly. Indeed, the revolutionaries’ claim to have abolished all “privileges” on the Night of August 4 opened up a range of possible interpretations and alternatives.</p>
<p>In fact, it is not difficult to imagine one or more series of events that might have produced a more egalitarian result from the abolition of privileges. It is too easy to conclude that “minds were not yet ready” for progressive taxes or land redistribution in the late eighteenth or early nineteenth century and that such innovations “necessarily” had to await the crises of the early twentieth century. It is often tempting in retrospect to lean toward deterministic readings of history and in this case to conclude that the thoroughly bourgeois French Revolution could not have led to anything but a proprietarian regime and an ownership society without any real attempt to reduce inequality. Although it is true that the invention of a new definition of property guaranteed by the centralized state was a complex undertaking, which many revolutionary legislators saw as the central if not sole purpose of the Revolution, it would be reductive to view the complex debates of the time as concerned only with this one approach. When one looks at how events unfolded and at what proposals were made by various participants, it becomes apparent that the idea of abolishing privileges could be interpreted in many different ways and could have led to many different legislative proposals. Had largely contingent circumstances been different, events might have taken many alternative paths, even though the course actually followed was already quite sinuous (as the “historical” and “linguistic” approaches suggest).</p>
<p>Beyond conflicts of interest, which should never be neglected, there were also intellectual conflicts. No one, then or now, has ready-made totally con<span aria-label="117" id="pg_117" role="doc-pagebreak"/>vincing solutions that would at once define “privileges,” explain how to eliminate them, and say how property should be regulated and inequality curbed in the society to come. During the Revolution, everyone could point to past experiences and ideas, and the whole community was involved in a vast and conflictual process of social learning. Everyone felt that <i>corvées, banalités,</i> and <i>lods</i> belonged to the past, yet many feared that eliminating them without compensation would undermine the whole system of rents and unequal ownership. Because no one could say where such a process would end, there was a temptation to maintain old rights in one form or another. While quite conservative, this position was comprehensible, yet it became the object of violent attacks by those who did not share it. Conflict and uncertainty are inevitable in events such as these.</p>
<p>Recent work has also shown that very vigorous debate on these issues, including inequality and property, agitated Europeans during the Enlightenment, contrary to the consensus view put forward by some scholars. Jonathan Israel distinguishes between a “radical” Enlightenment (represented by Diderot, Condorcet, Holbach, and Paine) and a “moderate” Enlightenment (represented by Voltaire, Montesquieu, Turgot, and Smith). The radicals generally supported the idea of a single assembly instead of separate chambers for each order as well as an end to the privileges of nobility and clergy and some form of redistribution of property. More generally, they favored greater equality of classes, sexes, and races. The “moderates” (who might equally well be characterized as “conservatives”) were suspicious of single assemblies and radical abolition of property rights, whether of landlords or slaveowners; they also had greater faith in natural, gradual progress. Outside of France, one of the most celebrated moderates was Adam Smith, the originator of the “invisible hand” of the market. According to the moderates, the principal virtue of the market was precisely that it made for human progress without violent upheaval or disruption of venerable political institutions.<sup><a href="#footnote-076" id="footnote-076-backlink" role="doc-noteref">12</a></sup></p>
<p>When one looks more closely at the positions of both groups on inequality and property, however, the differences are not always so clear. Many of the “radicals” also tended to rely on “natural forces.” Take, for example, this typical optimistic passage from the “radical” Condorcet’s <i>Esquisse d’un tableau historique des progress de l’esprit humain</i> (1794): “It is easy to prove that fortunes tend naturally toward equality, and their excessive disproportion either cannot <span aria-label="118" id="pg_118" role="doc-pagebreak"/>exist or must promptly cease if civil laws do not establish artificial means of perpetuating and combining them, and if freedom of commerce and industry eliminate the advantages that any prohibitive law or fiscal right gives to acquired wealth.”<sup><a href="#footnote-075" id="footnote-075-backlink" role="doc-noteref">13</a></sup> In other words, it is enough to eliminate privileges and charges and to establish equal access to different occupations and to property rights for existing inequalities to disappear at once. The fact that on the eve of World War I, more than a century after the abolition of “privileges,” the concentration of wealth in France was even higher than it was at the time of the Revolution, unfortunately proves that this optimistic view was wrong. To be sure, Condorcet did propose a form of progressive taxation in 1792, but it was a relatively modest measure (with a maximum rate of less than 5 percent on the highest incomes). Condorcet’s proposal was much more limited than those of less celebrated writers such as Lacoste and Graslin, who interestingly enough were practitioners in the areas of taxation and public administration rather than philosophers or academics; this did not prevent them from contributing bold and imaginative suggestions—quite the opposite.<sup><a href="#footnote-074" id="footnote-074-backlink" role="doc-noteref">14</a></sup> The most subversive actors were not always the ones identified by scholars.</p>
<p>In any case, specific reform proposals did exist, and some of them came from the most emblematic representatives of the Enlightenment. The Revolution might well have taken a different course, particularly if military and political tensions had not run so high in the period 1792–1795, thus allowing revolutionary legislators a little more time to experiment with concrete measures to redistribute wealth and reduce inequality. Think, too, of the pamphlet Thomas Paine addressed to French legislators in 1795, <i>Agrarian Justice.</i> He proposed a 10 percent tax on inheritances, the proceeds of which would go to finance an ambitious universal income—an idea that was far ahead of its <span aria-label="119" id="pg_119" role="doc-pagebreak"/>time.<sup><a href="#footnote-073" id="footnote-073-backlink" role="doc-noteref">15</a></sup> The 10 percent rate was admittedly quite moderate compared with the highly progressive tax schedules discussed and then enacted in the twentieth century; what is more, Paine’s proposal was for a quasi-proportional tax, whereas many more progressive proposals had been debated in previous years. It was nevertheless more substantial than the modest 1 percent tax that was finally adopted for direct line bequests under the tax system that was introduced during the French Revolution and that persisted throughout the nineteenth century.<sup><a href="#footnote-072" id="footnote-072-backlink" role="doc-noteref">16</a></sup></p>
<p>The rapidity with which things changed after World War I, when progressive taxes on income and inheritances were introduced in Europe and the United States, suggests that things could have been different. The rapid change of mentalities is even more telling: a tax schedule that had once seemed totally inconceivable was deemed acceptable by nearly everyone only a few years later. Had it been possible to experiment in a calm, serious way, even for just a few years, with concrete measures of the sort advocated by Condorcet and Paine in the 1790s (insofar as it is possible to experiment with institutions of this kind) under the aegis of a duly elected legislature, the course of events might have been different. It was by no means inevitable that the conservative and Napoleonic reaction would consolidate its position so quickly, with the return first of property qualifications for voting and then of <span class="accent">é</span>migr<span class="accent">é</span> nobles and slavery, during which Napoleon created a new imperial nobility. The point here is not to rewrite history but simply to stress the importance of the logic of events and of concrete historical experimentation in moments of political and ideological flux around issues of property and inequality. Rather than read history deterministically, it is more interesting to look at past events as <span aria-label="120" id="pg_120" role="doc-pagebreak"/>crossroads of ideas, forks in the road where history might have taken a different course.<sup><a href="#footnote-071" id="footnote-071-backlink" role="doc-noteref">17</a></sup></p>
</section>
<section epub:type="division">
<h1 class="head a-head"><a id="sec39"/><i>Proprietarian Ideology: Between Emancipation and Sacralization</i></h1>
<p class="noindent">More generally, the French Revolution illustrates a tension that we will encounter again and again in what follows. On the one hand, proprietarian ideology has an emancipatory dimension, which is real and should never be forgotten. On the other hand, it tends to bestow quasi-sacred status on existing property rights, regardless of origin or extent. This is just as real, and the inegalitarian and authoritarian consequences can be considerable.</p>
<p>Fundamentally, proprietarian ideology rests not only on a promise of social and political stability but also on an idea of individual emancipation through property rights, which are supposedly open to anyone—or at least any adult male, because nineteenth- and early twentieth-century ownership societies were resolutely patriarchal, bringing to bear all the force and inevitability of a modern centralized legal system. In theory, property rights are enforced without regard to social or family origin under the equitable protection of the state. Compared with trifunctional societies, which were based on relatively rigid status disparities between clergy, nobility, and third estate and on a promise of functional complementarity, equilibrium, and cross-class alliances, ownership society saw itself as based on equal rights. In ownership societies the “privileges” of the clergy and nobility no longer existed (or were at least considerably curtailed). Everyone was entitled to secure enjoyment of his property—safe from arbitrary encroachment by king, lord, or bishop—under the protection of stable, predictable rules in a state of laws, not men. Everyone therefore had an incentive to derive the maximum fruits from his property, <span aria-label="121" id="pg_121" role="doc-pagebreak"/>using whatever knowledge and talent he had at his disposal. Such clever use of every person’s abilities was supposed to lead naturally to general prosperity and social harmony.</p>
<p>This promise of equality and harmony found unambiguous expression in solemn declarations issuing from the “Atlantic revolutions” of the late eighteenth century. The Declaration of Independence that was adopted in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on July 4, 1776, begins with a ringing affirmation: “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.” The reality was more complex, however. Thomas Jefferson, the author of the declaration, owned some 200 slaves in Virginia but forgot to mention their existence or the fact that they would obviously continue to be somewhat less equal than their owners. Yet for the white settlers of the United States, the Declaration of Independence was an affirmation of equality and liberty in defiance of the arbitrary power of the king of England and the privileges of the House of Lords and House of Commons. Those assemblies of the privileged were exhorted to leave the settlers alone, to refrain from taxing them unfairly, and to stop interfering in their pursuit of happiness and conduct of affairs, including their management of their own property and inequalities.</p>
<p>We find the same radicality and comparable ambiguity in a different inegalitarian context with the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen, adopted by the National Assembly in August 1789 shortly after the vote to abolish privileges. Article 1 begins with a promise of absolute equality, marking a clear break with the old society of orders: “Men are born and remain free and equal in rights.” The remainder of the article raises the possibility of a just inequality, on which it nevertheless places conditions: “Social distinctions can only be based on common utility.” Article 2 clarifies things by according the right to property the status of an imprescriptible natural right: “The purpose of any political association is to preserve the natural and imprescriptible rights of Man. Those rights are liberty, property, security, and resistance to oppression.” In the end, the text can be interpreted in contradictory ways, and in practice it was. For instance, Article 1 can be given a relatively redistributive reading: “social distinctions”—that is, inequalities broadly construed—are acceptable only if they are of common utility and serve the general interest, which might mean that they have to serve the interests of the poorest members of society. This article could therefore be mobilized to call for redistribution of property in some form and thus to help the poor gain access to wealth. But <span aria-label="122" id="pg_122" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Article 2 could be read in a much more restrictive sense, since it implies that property rights acquired in the past are “natural and imprescriptible” and therefore difficult to challenge. In fact, this article was used in revolutionary debates to justify great caution when it came to the redistribution of property. More generally, references to property rights in various declarations of rights and constitutions were often used in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries to impose drastic legal limits on any possibility of a peaceful, legal redefinition of the property regime, and this continues to be the case today.</p>
<p>Indeed, once the abolition of privileges is proclaimed, many possible ways forward exist within the proprietarian schema, as we saw in the case of the French Revolution, with all its hesitations and ambiguities. For instance, one might argue that the best way to encourage equal access to property is to levy a steeply progressive tax on income and estates, and specific proposals along these lines were indeed formulated in the eighteenth century. More generally, one can make use of the emancipatory aspects of private property institutions (to allow room for the expression of various individual aspirations—something twentieth-century communist societies tragically chose to forget) while regulating and instrumentalizing those aspirations within the social state. One can also make use of redistributive institutions such as progressive taxes or pass laws to democratize access to knowledge, power, and wealth (as social-democratic societies tried to do in the twentieth century, even if their efforts were insufficient and incomplete; we will come back to this). Or, finally, one can rely on absolute protection of private property to resolve nearly all problems, which in some cases can lead to a quasi-sacralization of property and deep suspicion of any attempt to call it into question.</p>
<p>Critical proprietarianism (for simplicity, of the social-democratic type, which depends on mixed private, public, and social ownership) attempts to instrumentalize private property on behalf of higher objectives; exacerbated proprietarianism sacralizes it and transforms it into a systematic solution. Beyond these two general pathways there exists an infinite variety of imaginable solutions and trajectories. Importantly, still other paths remain to be invented. Throughout the nineteenth century and until World War I, exacerbated proprietarianism held sway with its quasi-sacralization of private property, not only in France but also throughout Europe. On the basis of the historical experience we have now acquired, it seems to me that this form of proprietarianism must be rejected. But it is important to understand the reasons why this ideological schema was successful, especially in nineteenth-century European ownership societies.</p>
</section>
<section epub:type="division">
<h1 class="head a-head"><a id="sec40"/><span aria-label="123" id="pg_123" role="doc-pagebreak"/><i>On the Justification of Inequality in Ownership Societies</i></h1>
<p class="noindent">Ultimately, the argument put forward by proprietarian ideology, implicitly in declarations of rights and constitutions and much more explicitly in the political debates around property that took place during the French Revolution and throughout the nineteenth century, can be summarized as follows. If one begins to question property rights acquired in the past, and the inequality that derives from them, in the name of a respectable but always imperfectly defined and contested conception of social justice about which consensus will never be achieved, doesn’t one run the risk of not knowing where this dangerous process will end? Political instability and permanent chaos may then ensue, ultimately to the detriment of people of modest means. It is therefore wrong to run this risk, argue intransigent proprietarians; redistribution is a Pandora’s box, which should never be opened. One runs into this type of argument repeatedly in the French Revolution; it explains many ambiguities and hesitations, in particular the hesitation about whether to adopt a “historical” or “linguistic” approach to existing rights and their retranscription as new property rights. If one questioned <i>corvées</i> and <i>lods,</i> wasn’t there a risk of undermining <i>loyers</i> and indeed the whole system of property rights in general? These arguments recur in the ownership societies of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and we will also find that they continue to play a fundamental role in contemporary political debate, particularly since the powerful revival of neo-proprietarian discourse in the late twentieth century.</p>
<p>The sacralization of private property is basically a natural response to fear of the void. The trifunctional schema had established a balance of power between warriors and clerics that was based on a large dose of religious transcendence (which was indispensable for bestowing legitimacy on the sage counsel of the clergy). Once this was abandoned, new ways of ensuring social stability had to be found. Absolute respect for property rights acquired in the past offered a new form of transcendence, which made it possible to avoid widespread chaos and fill the void left by the end of trifunctional ideology. The sacralization of property was in some ways a response to the end of religion as an explicit political ideology.</p>
<p>On the basis of historical experience, and of the rational knowledge that has been constructed out of that experience, I believe it is possible to do better. While the sacralization response was natural and comprehensible, it was also somewhat lazy and nihilistic as well as short on optimism regarding human nature. This book will try to convince the reader that one can draw on the lessons <span aria-label="124" id="pg_124" role="doc-pagebreak"/>of history to develop more satisfactory norms of social justice and equality, of economic regulation and redistribution of wealth, rather than using simple sacralization of existing property rights. Those norms must of course evolve over time and be open to permanent deliberation, yet they will still represent an improvement over the convenient option of settling for what already exists and taking as natural the inequalities produced by the “market.” Indeed, it was on such a pragmatic, empirical, and historical basis that the social-democratic societies of the twentieth century developed. For all their shortcomings, they showed that the extreme inequality of wealth that existed in the nineteenth century was by no means indispensable for maintaining stability and prosperity—far from it. We can build today’s innovative ideologies and political movements on this same basis.</p>
<p>The great weakness of proprietarian ideology was that property rights stemming from the past often raised serious problems of legitimacy. We saw this in the French Revolution, which simply transformed <i>corvées</i> into rents, and we will often encounter it again. For example, when slavery was abolished in French and British colonies, it was decided that slaveowners would have to be compensated, but not slaves. Another case in point concerns the postcommunist privatization of public property and private pillaging of natural resources. More generally, the problem is that—notwithstanding the possible violent or illegitimate origins of initial appropriations—significant, durable, and largely arbitrary inequalities of wealth tend to reconstitute themselves in today’s modern hypercapitalist societies, just as they did in premodern societies.</p>
<p>In any case, it is not easy to construct norms of justice acceptable to the majority. We cannot really tackle this complex question until we have completed our study and examined all available historical experiences, especially the crucial experiences of the twentieth century with respect to progressive taxation and, more generally, redistribution of wealth. These constitute not only material historical evidence that extreme inequality is by no means inevitable but also concrete operational knowledge of what minimal level of inequality one can hope to achieve. To be sure, the proprietarian argument concerning the need for institutional stability deserves to be taken seriously and carefully evaluated. So does the meritocratic argument, which played a less central role in the proprietarian ideology of the nineteenth century than in the neo-proprietarian ideology that has held sway since the late twentieth century. There will be much more to say about these various political and ideological twists and turns.</p>
<p><span aria-label="125" id="pg_125" role="doc-pagebreak"/>Broadly speaking, hard-core proprietarian ideology should be analyzed for what it is: a sophisticated discourse, which is potentially convincing in certain respects, because private property, when correctly redefined within proper limits, is one of the institutions that enable the aspirations and subjectivities of different individuals to find expression and interact constructively. But it is also an inegalitarian ideology, which in its harshest, most extreme form seeks simply to justify a specific form of social domination, often in excessive and caricatural fashion. Indeed, it is a very useful ideology for people and countries that find themselves at the top of the heap. The wealthiest individuals can use it to justify their position vis-<span class="accent">à</span>-vis the poorest: they deserve what they have, they say, because of their talent and effort, and in any case inequality contributes to social stability, which supposedly benefits everyone. The wealthiest countries can also justify their domination over the poorest on the grounds that their laws and institutions are superior. The problem is that the arguments and facts advanced in support of these positions are not always convincing. Before we analyze this history and the crises to which it led, however, we need to study how ownership societies evolved in France and elsewhere in Europe following their ambiguous beginnings in the French Revolution.</p>
</section>
<section epub:type="rearnotes" role="doc-endnotes">
<hr class="HorizontalRule-1"/>
<ol class="footnotes">
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">    <a href="#footnote-087-backlink" id="footnote-087">1</a></span>.  See the illuminating book by R. Blaufarb, <i>The Great Demarcation: The French Revolution and the Invention of Modern Property</i> (Oxford University Press, 2016), which makes pioneering use of parlement, administrative, and court records from the revolutionary period (along with many seventeenth- and eighteenth-century legal and political treatises). I borrow the term Great Demarcation from the title of this work.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">    <a href="#footnote-086-backlink" id="footnote-086">2</a></span>.  The conceptual break with the old order stands out even more clearly when one realizes that in the budgets of the monarchy, revenue stemming from royal estates was counted as “ordinary revenue,” whereas tax revenue was classified as “extraordinary.”</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">    <a href="#footnote-085-backlink" id="footnote-085">3</a></span>.  Recall that the price of land was generally fixed at about twenty years of rent; in other words, the annual rent on a property was about 5 percent of its value.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">    <a href="#footnote-084-backlink" id="footnote-084">4</a></span>.  The question of the term of a lease gave rise to complex debates. Revolutionary legislators rejected the idea of perpetual leases (because this would have recreated superpositions of perpetual rights of the feudal type). But some deputies (like Siey<span class="fn_accent">è</span>s, always quick to defend the small farmer against the lords, whom he accused of robbing the clergy), pointed out that extending the term of leases might be the best way to improve the social standing of peasants who lacked the cash necessary to buy a property; a perpetual lease was in some ways like a perpetual loan. Experiments with agrarian reform in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in several countries relied (de facto) on a combination of lease term extension and rent reduction; in some cases this amounted to a straightforward transfer of ownership to the user of the land for a very modest price or even free of charge. If reimbursement was too costly, however, it could amount to a perpetual trap.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">    <a href="#footnote-083-backlink" id="footnote-083">5</a></span>.  In 2019, the <i>droits de mutation</i> amounted to 5–6 percent of the sale value (including both local and state shares, and depending on the <i>département</i>). If notary fees are included, this rises to 7–8 percent (or roughly two or more years of rent).</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">    <a href="#footnote-082-backlink" id="footnote-082">6</a></span>.  The <i>lod</i> itself generally ranged from one-twelfth to one-half of the property value. The schedule for the redemption of <i>lods</i> thus explicitly took account of the fact that higher sales taxes led to less frequent sales. See Blaufarb, <i>The Great Demarcation,</i> p. 73.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">    <a href="#footnote-081-backlink" id="footnote-081">7</a></span>.  There were very interesting debates when Italian, Dutch, and German territories were departmentalized in 1810–1814. This led to an extremely conservative application of revolutionary proprietarian jurisprudence in these territories, where the Napoleonic authorities had no desire to create new classes of smallholders. Instead, they preferred to reclaim old feudal rights on behalf of the imperial state and use them to bolster new elites of their choosing. See Blaufarb, <i>The Great Demarcation,</i> pp. 111–117.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">    <a href="#footnote-080-backlink" id="footnote-080">8</a></span>.  See <i>Du droit national d’hérédité ou moyen de supprimer la contribution foncière,</i> 1792, Collection Portiez de l’Oise, pi<span class="fn_accent">è</span>ce n°22, La Biblioth<span class="fn_accent">è</span>que de l’Assembl<span class="fn_accent">é</span>e Nationale, Paris, France. According to this proposal, the tax on direct-line bequests exceeding 3 million <i>livres tournois</i> was to amount to two shares (that is, 67 percent where there was one heir, 50 percent where there were two, 40 percent where there were three, etc.). A fortune of 3 million livres was roughly 1,500 times the average wealth per adult at the time (which was around 2,000 livres). For direct-line bequests of 50,000 livres (or twenty-five times the average wealth), the tax was to be one-half share (or 33 percent with one heir, 20 percent with two heirs, 14 percent with three heirs, etc.). For fortunes below 2,000 livres (roughly the average), the tax was set at two-tenths of a share (or 17 percent with one heir, 9 percent with two, 6 percent with three). The rates for other bequests (outside the direct line) were higher still. Many similar brochures have been preserved in the archives, attesting to the vigor of contemporary debate.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">    <a href="#footnote-079-backlink" id="footnote-079">9</a></span>.  L. Graslin, <i>Essai analytique sur la richesse et l’impôt</i> (1767), pp. 292–293. Graslin proposed an effective rate of 5 percent on annual incomes of 150 <i>livres tournois</i> (roughly half the average adult income at the time), 15 percent on incomes of 6,000 livres (twenty times the average), 50 percent on 60,000 livres (200 times the average), and 75 percent on 400,000 livres (more than 1,300 times the average).</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">  <a href="#footnote-078-backlink" id="footnote-078">10</a></span>.  On local experiments and emergency measures in the period 1793–1794, see J.-P. Gross, “Progressive Taxation and Social Justice in 18th Century France,” <i>Past and Present,</i> 1993. For a more detailed analysis, see J.-P. Gross, <i>Egalitarisme jacobin et droits de l’homme (1793–1794)</i> (Arcanteres, 2000). Various systems of “maximal succession” and “national succession” (open to all) were also debated in 1793–1794 but never applied. On this subject, see F. Brunel, “La politique sociale de l’an II: un ‘collectivisme individualiste?’ ” in S. Roza and P. Cr<span class="fn_accent">é</span>tois, eds., <i>Le républicanisme social: Une exception française?</i> (Publications de la Sorbonne, 2014), pp. 107–128.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">  <a href="#footnote-077-backlink" id="footnote-077">11</a></span>.  See Blaufarb, <i>The Great Demarcation,</i> pp. 36–40. In <i>Considérations sur la noblesse</i> (1815), Louis de Bonald would also attempt to give new legitimacy to the nobility as a class of magistrates as well as warriors. See B. Karsenti, <i>D’une philosophie à l’autre. Les sciences sociales et la politique des modernes</i> (Gallimard, 2013), pp. 82–87.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">  <a href="#footnote-076-backlink" id="footnote-076">12</a></span>.  J. Israel, <i>A Revolution of the Mind: Radical Enlightenment and the Intellectual Origins of Modern Democracy</i> (Princeton University Press, 2010).</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">  <a href="#footnote-075-backlink" id="footnote-075">13</a></span>.  M. de Condorcet, <i>Esquisse d’un tableau historique des progrès de l’esprit humain</i> (1794), p. 380.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">  <a href="#footnote-074-backlink" id="footnote-074">14</a></span>.  In his <i>Mémoire sur la fixation de l’impôt,</i> Condorcet proposed that any new tax on personal furniture (the ancestor of today’s <i>taxe d’habitation,</i> or residential tax) should include a progressive rate on the rental value of the principal residence, with a maximum of 50 percent. Since rents decreased with income (contemporary estimates suggest that the poorest tenants paid more than 20 percent of their income in rent, compared with less than 10 percent for the wealthiest), Condorcet’s proposal was meant primarily to correct the structural regressivity of this tax (unfortunately, it was not adopted). On Condorcet’s fiscal proposals, see also J.-P. Gross, “Progressive Taxation and Social Justice in 18th Century France,” pp. 109–110.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">  <a href="#footnote-073-backlink" id="footnote-073">15</a></span>.  Born in England, Paine was a fervent proponent of American independence and later of the Revolution in France, where he settled in the 1790s. On the differences between Paine and Condorcet and the more innovative nature of Paine’s proposals, see Y. Bosc, “R<span class="fn_accent">é</span>publicanisme et protection sociale: l’opposition Paine-Condorcet,” in Roza and Cr<span class="fn_accent">é</span>tois, eds., <i>Le républicanisme social,</i> pp. 129–146.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">  <a href="#footnote-072-backlink" id="footnote-072">16</a></span>.  Note, moreover, that in <i>The Rights of Man</i> (1792) Paine proposed a tax rate of 80–90 percent on the highest incomes, starting at around 20,000 pounds sterling per year (roughly a thousand times the average British income at the time), a rate comparable to that proposed by Graslin in 1767. On Paine’s proposals, see also H. Phelps Brown, <i>Egalitarianism and the Generation of Inequality</i> (Oxford University Press, 1998), pp. 139–142.</p></li>
<li role="doc-endnote"><p class="FN"><span class="fn_tx">  <a href="#footnote-071-backlink" id="footnote-071">17</a></span>.  During the Cold War, the historiography of the Revolution was unfortunately divided between Marxist approaches (based on the highly disputable hypotheses that the Russian Revolution of 1917 was a natural sequel to the events of 1793–1794 in France) and anti-Marxist ones (based on the (equally debatable) principle that any ambitious attempt at social redistribution necessarily leads to terror and Soviet-like totalitarianism). See the online appendix for the main references (Albert Soboul versus Fran<span class="fn_accent">ç</span>ois Furet). This often caricatural instrumentalization of the French Revolution for the purposes of twentieth-century ideological combat explains why more refined political-ideological approaches such as Rafe Blaufarb’s on the redefinition of the property regime were slow to develop.</p></li>
</ol>
</section>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>