<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<title>Glossary</title>
<meta content="urn:uuid:d14591c1-b288-450e-b3bf-9c284094577c" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="backmatter">
<div class="body">
<p class="sp"> </p>
<section epub:type="glossary" role="doc-glossary">
<hgroup>
<h1 class="BMH"><span aria-label="1043" id="pg_1043" role="doc-pagebreak"/><a href="contents.xhtml#c_glo"><i>Glossary</i></a></h1>
</hgroup>
<p class="BMCO">Here is a brief list of terms that may be unfamiliar to the reader. These are marked with an asterisk at the point of first occurrence in the text.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">C</span><small>ENSITARY:</small> A censitary regime (from the French <i>censitaire</i>) was a regime in which the right to vote was subject to a property qualification, generally met by paying above a certain amount of property tax. For instance, during the Restoration in France (1815–1830), the right to vote was reserved to men over the age of 30 who paid at least 300 francs in direct taxes (which in practice granted eligibility to vote to about 100,000 people or roughly 1 percent of adult males). The precise requirement varied over time.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">G</span><small>INI COEFFICIENT:</small> A statistical measure of distribution which was developed by the Italian statistician Corrado Gini in 1912. It is used as a gauge of economic inequality, measuring income distribution among a population. The coefficient ranges from zero to one, with zero representing perfect equality and one representing perfect inequality.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">G</span><small>REAT</small> <span class="glt_CAPS">D</span><small>EMARCATION:</small> A term introduced by the historian Rafe Blaufarb to describe a shift in the property ownership regime that occurred during the French Revolution, which resulted in a strict separation between regalian functions (henceforth the monopoly of the centralized state) and property rights (henceforth to be granted solely to private individuals), whereas trifunctional society was based on an inextricable imbrication of both.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">I</span><small>DENTITARIAN</small> (Fr. <i>identitaire</i>): An identitarian ideology is an ideology structured around identification with a specific social group, often based on an ethnic, racial, or religious identity.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">I</span><small>NEQUALITY REGIME:</small> A set of discourses and institutional arrangements intended to justify and structure the economic, social, and political inequalities of a given society.</p>
<p class="GL"><i>L<small>IVRE TOURNOIS:</small></i> Monetary unit of account used in France during the Middle Ages and early modern period.</p>
<p class="GL"><span aria-label="1044" id="pg_1044" role="doc-pagebreak"/><span class="glt_CAPS">O</span><small>WNERSHIP SOCIETY</small> (sometimes called proprietarian society): A social order based on a quasi-religious defense of property rights as the sine qua non of social and political stability. Ownership societies flourished in Europe and the United States in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">P</span><small>ATRIMONIAL MIDDLE CLASS:</small> That portion of the wealth distribution extending from the fiftieth to the ninetieth percentile. In other words, the “middle 40 percent” of the wealth distribution standing between the bottom 50 percent and the top 10 percent.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">P</span><small>REMODERN:</small> As used in this book, “premodern” means prior to the eighteenth century.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">P</span><small>ROPRIETARIAN:</small> See Ownership society, also called proprietarian society. Proprietarian ideology is the ideology of ownership society, based on the sacralization of property rights.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">R</span><small>EGALIAN RIGHTS OR POWERS:</small> The powers of security, justice, and legitimate use of violence.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">S</span><small>OCIETY OF ORDERS:</small> A type of society based on an equilibrium between intellectual and warrior elites and on specific forms of ownership and power relations. See also Trifunctional society.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">S</span><small>UCCESSORAL:</small> Pertaining to inheritance.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">T</span><small>ERNARY SOCIETY:</small> See Trifunctional society.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">T</span><small>RAJECTORIES AND SWITCH POINTS:</small> The French text refers to <i>trajectoires et bifurcations</i> to describe the paths taken by different societies in their historical evolutions. Here, <i>bifurcations</i> has been translated as “switch points” to refer to points in time where a crucial turn was taken.</p>
<p class="GL"><span class="glt_CAPS">T</span><small>RIFUNCTIONAL SOCIETY:</small> A trifunctional society is one whose structure comprises three functional groups: clergy, nobility, and workers (the third estate). The ternary or trifunctional pattern can be found in nearly all premodern societies throughout the world, including China and Japan.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>